I saw a newspaper article in which it was reported that a commercial space company was planning to build a city on Mars. The article was in portuguese so it wasn't clear if they were serious, or perhaps they just planned to make a Sim City version, but I began pondering whether the real venture would work. Here's why it wouldn't.

In some ways, Mars would make an excellent holiday location. The hiking would be great, with Mars boasting the [highest mountain](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Olympus_Mons) and one of the [largest canyons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valles_Marineris) on any planet in the Solar System. The gravity being lower than Earth's would make hiking comparatively easy, assuming human biomechanics are equally efficient in the lower gravity setting. Snowboarding on the polar ice caps might initially seem fun, until one realises that Mars [no longer has a hydrosphere](http://www.lpi.usra.edu/meetings/5thMars99/pdf/6236.pdf) and thus no snow. The thinner air will be great for aerodynamic cycling, so mountain biking could really take off, but having to attach a sled to carry the oxygen tanks needed to breathe might put a dampener on things. (Geddit? Friction -> dampen- oh I give up.)

[image, double-panel. Left: hiker in martian mountains, with a very heavy oxygen tank rucksack. Right: cyclist with sled carrying multiple oxygen cylinders (think tank wheels, or something like the Opportunity rover).]

We're going to assume that there is a safe passage to Mars, free from dangerous space weather. The most immediate concern is of cost. Let us assume it would cost 500,000€ per person. At that cost, baggage allowance policies are going to be tougher than Ryan Air's, and one can hardly afford to go for a holiday. In fact, the [520-day travel time](http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/Mars500/SEMGX9U889G_0.html) might also be an issue. The solution to the huge cost is to be a project scientist so you get to go for free! Which implies the population will consist of 90% scientists and 10% people with too much money. This is a win for the average IQ, but a loss for practical amenities. Let's face it, nobody is making that trip to go there and stack shelves.

[image, double panel. Left: staring longingly out the spaceship window, squashed in like sardines. Right: youth stacking shelves in a martian supermarket. Thought bubble: I'd give anything to be back on that spaceship again.]

And that, my friends, is why building a city on Mars is doomed. At least until terraforming is complete and robot servants are commonplace.